... Jerusalem But it is equally important for all religions and for all nationalities because Jerusalem is considered to be the spiritual capital of the whole world, 

and I'm saying this because I do know the eyes of the whole world are focusing here in Jerusalem, why?

because Jerusalem is so sacred and politic place with respect to history

There are two kinds of history, right?

One is the history made by humans, the supposed profane history,

and then there is the sacred history, the history the history of Salvation, the history that began at mount Sinai because of Moses

and culminated in here in the birth the define incarnation of the divine Logos, what occurred in Bethlehem and His passion and crucifixion in here, in Jerusalem, and here of course, his resurrection.

And what has made Jerusalem to be unique and so important for everybody

is the fact that that this part of the earth has ... is unique, privileged to have been ...

(water) and therefore.. blessed in sacrifice by the very (endearing God that follows the skys?).

And not only this, I want you to bear in mind that this part of the earth hosted in her bosom the very body of our Lord Jesus Christ.

That is to say he was buried here, He was resurrected here, Right?

And this is what makes Jerusalem to be a unique place and to be the sacred city for the whole world.

and .. they.. I mean the (?..?) after the.. is exalted over the sanctity of Jerusalem and the Patriarchate of Jerusalem is the embodiment of the history here and the embodiment of Jerusalem.

Why? because the Patriarchate of Jerusalem? the Temple of Jerusalem is the Holy Church that has been built upon it over the foundations of the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ.

And it is from here that the Church has expanded all over the world. This is why the Jerusalem is the mother... the Jerusalem church is the mother of all the churches.

And, it is true, that the only church that really remains unshakable and keeps unchanged the apostolic tradition, sound and clear, is the church of Jerusalem.

Why? because this is this is the only church that is the church of the liturgy, is the church of prayer.

The protestants and the Catholics, and many others, they say that the Orthodox church they are spend all their time in prayers, just prayers and prayers.

And then, we are proud of it, and take pride in it.

Why? because the foundation the importance of the church is the divine liturgy, the sacrament of the divine Eucharist.

Because it is in there, when we participate in and partake of the divine Eucharist of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, that we make clear that the body, that the church, is not an institution; is not an organisation like many others, a charitable organization.

Because the ultimate purpose of the Church is not charity,  is not... I don't know what else..

the most and ultimate purpose of the Church is to make us worthy, to attain to the vision.. not with physical eyes, the physical side.

And most importantly, with the contemplation with the eyes of the soul to attain to the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, the glory that was manifested as the uncreated light on the day of our Lord's transfiguration on mount Tabor

Where there, His disciples were present, they have this unique experience and the light that was manifested on mount Tabor on the day of our Lord's transformation / transfiguration (probably you will have to forgive)

It is, what they call, our salvation  it is what we call in very simple words the paradise, this is the uncreated light.

That is to say, the ultimate purpose of the Church, of the Orthodox Church is to make us worthy to join the human nature of our Lord Jesus Christ because he was resurrected not for His own sake.

Our Lord Jesus Christ, he was the master, He was the master of life and death, so His resurrection concerns our own resurrection.

That is to say the humanity, our own humanity, that He has shown, and He made His own, and delivered from all sorts of sicknesses, delivered from the bondage of corruption, etcetera.

Now, this is why Jerusalem is very important.

Why? because here the Holy places are not just mere stones because this is what the protestants they say it doesn't matter, you don't need merely stones we need the living stones.

But those people, they fail to understand that the earth itself the Holy places are not just historical monuments or the (muslim? )  sites, but are the living and undeniable testimony and witness to the sacred history.

That is to say, to our dead, and our crucified and risen Lord Jesus Christ.

And the Holy places are..  remain as the disciples of Christ during our Lord's earthly life, the... most of them, they have the opportunity, in many cases, to see the invisible light and to understand those spiritual lights, both the humanity and the divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ. Right?

And today, we have the same opportunity.

Why?  because our Lord Jesus Christ is both invisible is intangible, and at the same time visible and tangible.

How?  it is given through His own church, and the Church is the body of Christ, not just the bride of Christ, as Saint Paul says.

But also, Christ Himself is the head of His body, is the head of the Church.

I want always to emphasis this because protostants they say that the church is the body of Christ only.

And the thing is this, that the Church is Christ risen in our history.

Christ who is extending to the ages of ages.

And the way to understand Christ is both invisible but the same visible is untouchable and touchable is when we see the Church as the sacrament of the divine Eucharist.

It is in and through the divine Eucharist that we realize that the Church is not an organization that promotes moral values.

This is not enough to be just "Good" doesn't mean anything.

Puritanism has nothing to do.. and moralism has nothing to do with our understanding, the Orthodox concept of the Church.

For us, the Church, Christ, is the reality, is part and parcel of our presence here,

is the prototype,  is evidence, and the way of salvation is in and through Christ.

Not just by giving good sermons and present the Church in the moralistic way, this is total illusion. Right?

You have to be very careful because otherwise, if I understand Christian values and the Bible, and the mystery of the incarnation the way the protestants understand it,

it is total disaster because there, and in other religions, you have moral values and moral ("do-nots"?)  but you should not understand the Church in this way.

In Jerusalem, in the church of Jerusalem has this belief,
mission, this unique power.

Why? because here, in this holy land, especially in Jerusalem the atmosphere is totally theocratic.

I don't mean that in a negative way, but it is the truth.

Everybody who is here and everybody who debates here has claims, religious claims.

As in the reason that the whole nationalities here, all the national entities, they want... and communities, they want to be here in this for religious reasons and not anything else

Because Holy land and Jerusalem they don't promote financial or military or whatever interests. Correct?

So, the mission of the Patriarchate here, I mean the church that I said before is our church here, the Orthodox church, is the only church, religious and christian institution that, 

throughout the ages, has one mission, the mission is:

spiritual and religious and thanks to the Patriarchate here that the.. most of the Holy places have been protected and guarded (other did survive?).

Otherwise, most of all of them would have been vanished and destroyed, as has happened to some of them.

And what is characteristic of the brotherhood here of the Holy (?) ?

Is that throughout the ages, for almost two thousand years, the church the Holy places have remained.. have sustained as places of worship.

And this is True! because day and night in the all.. in most all holy places, you have services.

And this is... I mean if you go to the Holy Sepulcher, day and night there are all the services and especially the Divine Liturgy.

The same applies to the church of the nativity, the same applies to the tomb of the Virgin Mary (Kistomony?), the same in Nazareth and in many other places.

We (?) them like the apostle Thomas.

Everybody knows that St. Thomas, he was so eager, Right?

To see with his physical eyes, and to touch with his physical senses, the very body of Christ, in order to make clear to himself that Christ in God and He is Lord. Right?

Now, you are here like the apostle Thomas.
Why? because you've given this blessing, this opportunity 

to come and see with your own... to experience.. to see with your own physical eyes and to touch with your own hands all those holy places that bear witness,

as I've said,

to the sacred history, to the life of both the old testament, to the personalities of the old testament, to the prophets, 
and also to the...
personalities and to the life and to the preaching and miracles  of our Lord Jesus Christ here in the Holy Land.

This is why your pilgrimage here differs from any other pilgrimage to any other place of the world.

Having sent the... prophet David says that the earth belongs to God, and therefore, whatever the earth contains is perfect, is complete.

And it is true, that the whole creation, which is the creation of God is Holy and perfect

but here there is something very... specific and this specific is that this part of the earth is associated with the...

divine... with the mystery of the divine economia, the mystery of the dispensation, the mystery of the... salvation.

And this is why your pilgrimage here in the land of the church of Jerusalem is called a pilgrimage of theoria.

Theoria... in the... it's a greek word, theory, but theoria in the language of the church fathers means two things.

One is: Theoria through the physical eyes, visions; and the other is theoria of the spiritual eyes is contemplation, correct?

And because here people are given this opportunity to feel the life of our Lord Jesus Christ,

 His preaching, His miracles, His passion, His crucifixion, His resurrection, His baptism, His ascension;

This is why I just spoke (?) of theoria,  correct?

And now... again... here... What is the power of the church of Jerusalem?

We've seen that It is the only place that when the pilgrims.. from around the world.. of all Orthodox nationalities and.. countries, when they come here they get together, and every time we receive pilgrims from around the Orthodox world, we demonstrate and actually celebrate our own Pentecost. Right?

And we demonstrate our unity and our oneness in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

And baptize unity, and this one is by no means.. reduces... or minimizes our special, natural, linguistic, national, etcetera... identity.. and above all our biological identity.

I have to emphasize this because because you come from separate countries and unfortunately today people must be very careful because the modern world is not modern world. 

It is something very sad, and very bad because today, what globalization promotes, and people do not understand, because they are very much misled, the so-called globalization is the language of the evil powers, is the language of the devil.

Now, globalization has already.. come.
Globalization.. we understand globalization in terms of our Lord Jesus Christ.

He is the new creation, He is the new age, He is everything new.  He is the uniter, Correct?

In Christ we have our own globalization; because in Christ, our humanity.. our common humanity is there. He assumed common humanity, not the humanity of George and Peter and Paul, he assumed common humanity; which means, potentially speaking, everybody is a kind of (?)..

But today's globalization is very misleading.

Why? because the target of globalization is "one". And this "one" is... the target is the Orthodox Church.

Why the Orthodox Church? because the Orthodox Church is the only church that strongly guards the apostolic tradition, and the only church that... holds.. I mean this.. strong.. to the teaching of our Lord Jesus Christ.

And Christ Himself spoke of His own identity and His own name and therefore of our own identity.

Each one of us has his own name, his own identity, he is unique, he is a person, (?)  because everybody has been made after the image and likeness of God.

And therefore, identity is very important; and the target of globalization today is how to destroy identity.

This is why, today, you hear the European union, the spokesman, and people from your own countries, that they promote the so called "liberal values".

This is extremely dangerous and very misleading.

Liberal values, liberal democracies, is against, very much, of the dignity and the uniqueness of the human being, of the likeness.. and image.. of our God.

Therefore,.. and this is what Jerusalem is doing here, everywhere, outside the Holy land, everyone speaks about globalization, the only place that globalization has no place, it is here, in Jerusalem.

Why? because the people here, the nationalities here, the nations, they are religious entities. Don't believe the politician, don't believe anyone.

Here, if you don't have religious affiliation, you have no existence. Correct?

And this is why.. people are..  everybody's eyes are on Jerusalem.

And the Patriarchate, I mean our Church... this is...  I say our Church because the Orthodox Church is one... and unique.

And we here, we don't represent ourselves, we represent the whole world, the whole christendom, and more specifically, we represent our brother and sisters, I mean the Orthodox brother and sisters.

And here, the Patriarchate is the only church that keeps and guards, not only the holy places, but keeps and guards the Christian character of the holy land, and especially of the holy city of Jerusalem.

And when I say the holy city, I mean the old city.

If it wasn't for the Patriarchate, today, the christian character of Jerusalem would have been totally altered, and disappeared. Right?

And.. we are here.. our presence here it's a daily miracle.

So, I wish you a blessed (?) and a blessed pilgrimage, and please, when you go back home, try to become messengers; and to convey and communicate to your own countrymen, your relatives, what you have experienced.. I mean what you have seen, what you have heard, so that... your own countrymen, the young generation would be encouraged to have their own pilgrimage here.

And this only for one reason: in order to strengthen and make people understand that the Church is in the holy place, that garuntees our nativity, our faith, our identity. 

Welcome and God bless you.

Fr. Gregory - Thank you Sayedna. Sayedna; one brief question, for our pilgrims while they're here, perhaps you could tell them how to prepare their hearts now to see all the holy places and to be with Christ. Just the interior spirit to help them bring this message back home. 

To be here and to not just see the holy places but to take a part in and to participate in the divine liturgies, the divine Eucharist that is taking place both in the holy sepulcher nd in the holy places.

(unintelligible conversation)
 